---
title: "Cosmological perturbations in the interacting dark sector: Mapping fields and fluids"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2021-01-06-DEDM1
excerpt: ''
date: 2021-01-06
venue: 'Physical Review D'
#slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides1.pdf'
#paperurl: 'https://github.com/josephpjohnson/web/tree/master/files/JCAP01(2022)024_DEDM2.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1475-7516/2022/01/024'
citation: 'Joseph P. Johnson and S. Shankaranarayanan, PHYSICAL REVIEW D 103, 023510 (2021)'
---

There is no unique way to describe the dark energy–dark matter interaction, as we have little information
about the nature and dynamics of the dark sector. Hence, in many of the phenomenological dark matter
fluid interaction models in the literature, the interaction strength Q_ν in the dark sector is introduced by
hand. Demanding that the interaction strength Q ν in the dark sector must have a field theory description, we
obtain a unique form of the interaction strength. We show the equivalence between the fields and fluids for
the f(R, χ) model where f is an arbitrary, smooth function of R and a classical scalar field χ, which
represents dark matter. Up to first order in perturbations, we show that the one-to-one mapping between the
classical field theory description and the phenomenological fluid description of interacting dark energy
and dark matter exists only for this unique form of interaction. We then classify the interacting dark
energy models considered in the literature into two categories based on the field-theoretic description.
We introduce a novel autonomous system and its stability analysis for the general interacting dark sector.
We show that the dark-energy-dominated epoch occurs earlier than the noninteracting systems for a specific
scalar field potential and a range of coupling strengths.
