---
title: "Constraining the dark energy-dark matter interaction model using low-redshift observations"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2023-03-MGdedm2
excerpt: ''
date: 2023-03
venue: 'The Sixteenth Marcel Grossmann Meeting'
paperurl: 'https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/10.1142/9789811269776_0153'
citation: 'Archana Sangwan, P J Joseph, and S. Shankaranarayanan, The Sixteenth Marcel Grossmann Meeting, pp. 1948-1960 (2023)'
---

Various observations have shown that dark energy accounts for nearly two-thirds of the energy density of the Universe. 
The simplest model to explain the nature of dark energy is the cosmological constant (ΛCDM) model. Although Planck observations 
supports using ΛCDM model as the base cosmological model, there exist some inconsistencies in parameter estimates when compared 
with independent observations. The most important is the inconsistency in the H0 estimates from the Planck collaboration which 
reports H0=67.5+0.5−0.5kms−1Mpc−1, a considerably lower value when compared with the direct local distance ladder measurements. 
This value shows a discrepancy at the level greater than 4σ with the constraints reported by SH0ES collaboration in 2019, 
H0=74.3+1.42−1.42kms−1Mpc−1. These disagreements, called the Hubble tension, point towards a new physics that deviates from the 
standard ΛCDM model and to resolve this various methods have been proposed. In this work, a quintessence scalar field with an 
inverse power potential (V(ϕ)∽ ϕ−n) is assumed as a description of dark energy and we focus on an interacting dark energy dark 
matter model where the interacting term is taken to be linear in the field (Φ). We study in detail the evolution of the model and provide constraints on the model parameters using low redshift cosmological observations of Type Ia Supernovae (SN), baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO), direct measurements of Hubble parameter (Hz) and high redshift HII galaxy measurements (HIIG). We find that the model agrees with the existing values of the nonrelativistic matter density parameter, Ωm and dark energy equation of state parameter, w0. The analysis shows that the observations prefer a negative value of coupling constant and gives the best fit value of H0=69.9+0.46−1.02kms−1Mpc−1 and thereby can be used to alleviates the H0 tension between Planck measurements and the observations considered.
